Hi, my name is Louis McCallum,
welcome to our talk with the W3C workshop
on web and machine learning,
covering the topic of empowering musicians and artists
using machine learning
to build their own tools in the browser.
slide-2
Over the past two years,
as part of the RCUK AHRC funded Mimic Project,
we've provided platforms and libraries
for musicians and artists
to use, perform, and collaborate online
using machine learning.
Although it has a lot to offer these communities,
their skill sets and requirements
often diverge from more conventional
machine learning use cases.
slide-3
During this short talk,
we will address three key requirements
when designing for these users.
Primarily we're describing machine learning programs
that run in real time.
That is, they receive rich data
from microphones, cameras, external sensors and controllers
in real time, whilst concurrently running inference
and generating media output within the browser
without audible and visible interference.
slide-4
Secondly, we focus on supporting the needs
of end user machine learning,
where end users themselves collect data
and train and evaluate models on their own browsers.
This is a distinct use case to other web projects
that seek to provide pre-trained models
for using and generating media in the browser.
slide-5
Thirdly, we support an iterative approach to training
and evaluating in real time or near real time feedback loop.
This is sometimes known as interactive machine learning.
It allows for users
from a wide range of technical, nontechnical,
and creative backgrounds to develop interactive systems
with complex media data
that they'd have struggled to program by hand,
perhaps also with behaviors
they wouldn't have thought to program by hand.
Beyond this it's been useful for working with children
with special educational needs and disabilities.
For example, the Sound Control project,
and in gaming in Unity,
you can check out the InteractML project.
This approach to machine learning is also excellent,
in the educational settings.
Working with interactive media
can be a really accessible stepping stone to data literacy.
slide-6
So why would we want to do this in a browser?
Building browser based tools is useful
because they require little of the installation
and dependencies that plenty other data science endeavors.
slide-7
Additionally, JavaScript is a fast growing language
with low barriers to entry.
It's often taught to computer science
and creative computing students,
which is useful for us.
slide-8
Moreover,
developing code in browsers and embracing technologies
like web sockets opens up great opportunities
for real time, remote
code and non-code based collaborations.
slide-9
While some solutions
for increasing efficiency of in-browser machine learning
rely on a client server model,
it's not suitable for us,
for reasons of both performance and privacy.
The latency of using remote backend to do machine learning
will almost certainly be inappropriate
for many real time performance use cases.
slide-10
Further, as users will be recording their own datasets
sensitive data may be required to remain
on their local machines.
slide-11
Finally, our own experience,
as well as user feedback has informed us
that in situations of live performance,
educational settings, and long running installations,
relying on internet connections can be infeasible.
As such, we see in-browser solutions
for training, data storage and inference
highly, highly, highly preferable.
slide-12
So, with these clear advantages to developing
end user machine learning tools in the browser,
we also seek to address the non-trivial technical challenges
of connecting media and sensory inputs
from a variety of sources, running these alongside
potentially computationally expensive feature extractors,
also running lightweight machine learning models
and generating audio and visual output,
all in real time,
all concurrently,
all without interference.
slide-13
For example,
we might want to use the BodyPix feature extractor
to get a skeleton data from webcam,
and use a regression model
to control multiple synthesizers.
slide-14
Alternatively,
we might want to use a neural network
to generate frames of spectral data,
and then turn this into audio.
slide-15
Whilst technologies like AudioWorklets
address this to some extent,
and we welcome the recent introduction of it into Firefox,
there remains some issues with implementation and adoption.
For example, issues with garbage collection
created by the worker thread messaging system,
caused wide-scale disruption
to many developers using AudioWorklets,
and was only really addressed by a ring buffer solution
that developers had to integrate themselves
outside of the core API.
At the time, because of this bug in chromium,
there were two to three months over the winter of 2019,
where running computationally heavy
machine learning processes
and generating audio at the same time
caused these horrible pops and crackles and stuff.
And because AudioWorklets was only implemented
in one browser, that's Chrome,
we were unable to offer our users any alternatives.
slide-16
We welcome the efficiency and usability increases
to in-browser computation
made available through the WebGPU API.
It's crucial that it's adopted as a standard
across all browsers,
and that the API itself
and any machine learning libraries using it
take real time media into account
when implementing themselves.
slide-17
Finally,
although the capabilities of in-browser media creation
are expanding, the majority of practitioners
remain using software tools outside of the browser
to generate sound and visuals.
Until browser support for media generation is improved
to allow an ecosystem of tools
similar to that existing outside of the browser,
this is going to continue to be the case.
So, serving the dual purposes
of getting data into the browser to build data sets
to train models, and
outputting controlled data
generated by machine learning models,
we seek to further increase
the adoption of connectivity technologies,
such as Web MIDI and WebBLE.
The WorldWide Developer Conference in 2020
actually sort of Safari disavow
both of these as a fingerprinting security precaution.
Safari has also made little suggestion
it's going to adopt the AudioWorklets infrastructure.
slide-18
So, to wrap it up,
we seek to prioritize accessible machine learning.
There's a focus on end users building their own datasets
dynamically and training their own models on the fly,
in conjunction with real time media analysis and generation.
There's a community of developers, researchers,
educators, and creatives,
who are able to produce software and resources
to enable end users who want to use machine learning
in this manner.
However,
we're looking at the W3C, and developers of web browsers
to allow the performance and the connectivity
to make these techniques viable,
sustainable, and accessible,
and to just keep us in mind,
and this particular use case in mind
when defining standards or choosing to adopt standards.
slide-19
We'd like to call on those watching this video
with an interest in the web and machine learning
to actively work to uplift black voices
within the research community.
A good place to start is checking out
the Black in AI, online community,
as well as adhering to the praxis of
The Cite Black Women Collective;
read black women's work,
integrate black women's work into the core of your syllabus,
acknowledge black women's intellectual production,
make space for black women to speak,
give black women the space and time to breathe.
slide-20
Okay, thanks for listening.
Check out the MIMIC website,
enroll in the free FutureLearn course,
if you want to learn more.
You can also read some of the publications,
I think we'll put up a slide at the end
with some of that information on.
slide-21
Thank you.